# Databases - 09/29/2014 - Procedures and Junk

## Procedure Extensions and Stored Procedure
Stored procedures and extensions allow us to create domain-specific functions
that allow us to express application and business logic conveniently and
concisely.

```sql
create function dept_count(dept_name varchar(20))
    returns integer
begin
    declare d_count integer;
    select count(*) into d_count
    from instructor
    where instructor.dept_name = dept_name
    return d_count;
end
```

The previous function could be stored as a procedure instead. There are a number
of differences. Functions can be used within queries, whereas procedures must be
called.

If a particular function is likely to occur in multiple applications, it might
be worth defining that function on the database level, so it doesn't have to be
redefined. Additionally, procedures may be used to encapsulate data required for
particular operations.

## Triggers
Triggers automatically execute when some condition is satisfied.

```sql
create trigger timeslot_check1 after insert on section...
```

Triggers can be activated when not intended. This is something developers need
to be careful about. It is also important to track whether triggers are chained
or called frequently, as it can affect performance.

## The E-R Model
The abstract concepts (entities and relations) and how they are mapped to
physical design. How do you represent and relate things?

Major pitfalls: redundancy and incompleteness. For large enterprises, it can be
very difficult to design the database properly. Iterative processes help.

This model is popular and oft-used, with three basic concepts: entity sets,
relationship sets, and attributes.

* Entity: an object that exists and is distinguishable from other objects.
    Have properties and may be concrete or abstract.
* Entity set: a set of entities of the same type with the same attributes.
* Relationship: an association between several entities.
* Relationship set: can have descriptive attributes, which tell you something
    about the relationships (ex. date that two entities met).

