# Computer Networks - 09/03/2014

The Internet is based on the three-tier ISP structure. There are millions of
access-level ISPs, which grew from a few hundred.

## How did the three tier architecture come about?
If we connected every ISP to all others, we'd need routers with millions of
interfaces (n * n-1 / 2). This doesn't scale.

The idea was to introduce ISPs in the middle, reducing the number of connections
needed at access-level ISPs. Even at this level, it doesn't scale well.

Internet exchange points (IXPs) allow ISPs to peer with one another to increase
connectivity.

Regional ISPs bridge the gap between Tier 1 ISPs and access ISPs.

Content Provider Networks often act as Tier 1 ISPs due to the level of traffic
that they generate.

## Wireless Access Networks
Wireless Access Networs are shared wireless networks that connect an end system
to a router.

* Wireless LAN (802.11): dominant protocol at the access level.
* Wide area wireless access: provided by telco operators. 3G, 4G, LTE bands.

## Hosts
Hosts send packets.

This works in the following way:
* takes application message.
* breaks into smaller chunks called **packets** of size **L** bits.
* transmits packet into access network at transmission rate **R**.
* transmission delay: L / R.
* transmission rate is also known as capacity or bandwidth.

## Physical Media
There are guided media and unguided media. Guided media propogates signal in
solid media, whereas unguided media propogates freely.

Unguided radio signals include microwave, LAN (WiFi), wide-area (cellular), and
satellite.

## Queuing Delay and Loss
If the arrival rate of packets to a router exceeds the tranmission rate, you end
up with a delay. The packets will queue, but if they time out or the memory
buffer fills up, they will be lost.

## Two Key Network-Core Functions
* routing: determines source destination taken by packets, with routing
    algorithms.
* forwarding: move packets from router's input to appropriate router output.

## Alternative Core: circuit switching
Circuit switching involves dedicating resources in the circuit. This guarantees
performance, but often leads to waste: if the channel isn't being used for its
designated purpose, that bandwidth goes unused entirely. This is commonly used
in traditional telephone networks.

## Packet Switching vs. Circuit Switching
Packet switching can handle more users, due to resources being shared. Most
users are not constantly sending data.

## Sources of Delay:
node-to-node delay = processing + queuing + transmission + propagation

Transmission and propagation delay sound similar but are not. Transmission
refers to the amount of time it takes to push the packet onto the link.
Propagation is the amount of time it takes to move the packet to the other node,
limited by the medium it is being transmitted over.

## Throughput
The rate of bits at which data is transferred. This can be measured
instantaneously or averaged.

Data rate is determined by the slowest link in the process.

