# Networking - 09/15/2014 - Chapter 2 continued

## Web and HTTP
* Webpages consist of objects.
    * Object can be an HTML file, JPEG image, Java applet, audio file, etc.
* Webpages consist of base HTML-file, which includes several referenced objects.
* Each webpage is addressable by a URL.

## HTTP
HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol. This is the web's application layer
protocol. It uses a client-server model:
* client: browser requests, receives and displays web objects.
* server: web server sends objects in response to requests.

HTTP uses TCP: a client initiates a connection on port 80, the server accepts,
messages are sent back and forth, and finally the TCP connection closes.

HTTP is stateless: servers remember no information about past client requests.

### Connections
There are two types of connections in HTTP: non-persistent and persistent.
* non-persistent: at most one object is sent over TCP, and the connection is
    then closed. This way, downloading multiple objects requires multiple
    connections.
* persistent: multiple objects can bee sent over a single TCP connection between
    client and server.

### Cookies
Many websites use cookies. These have four components:
* header of response message
* header of next request
* file on client
* info from database.

A lot of websites use these to keep information about the users. They can be
used for authorization, shopping carts, recommendations, uses session state,
etc.

### Web Caches (proxy server)
The goal of a proxy server is to satisfy client requests, without involving the
origin server.

## FTP
FTP is file transfer protocol. It is a persistent protocol used for transferring
files to/from a client and server. FTP uses two ports, 20 (data) and 21
(control).

In an FTP connection, the client can browse and search directories. Data
connections are closed and reopened after each file is transferred.

### Commands
* USER username
* PASS password
* LIST
* RETR filename
* STOR filename

### Return Codes
There are a number of status codes for FTP. They aren't as organized as those
for HTTP.

## Email
Email has three major components:
* User agents
* mail servers
* simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP)

### Mail Servers
Mail servers contain incoming and outgoing mail, and handle the routing.
