# Networking - 09/22/2014 - DNS

## DNS Records
DNS is a distributed database storing resource records (RR)

RR Format: (class, name, value, type, ttl). Class is usually Internet (IN), can
be omitted.

* Types:
    * A: name is hostname, value is IP address
    * NS: name is domain, value is hostname of authoritative name server for
        this domain.
    * CNAME: name is alias name for some 'canonical' (real) name, value is
        canonical name
    * MX: value is name of a mailserver associated with name.

## DNS name resolution:
* iterative query
* recursive query

## DNS Protocol, Messages
* query and reply messages, both with the same message format.
* includes a header:
    * identification: 16 bit number for query, reply uses same number.
    * flags: query or reply, recursion desired, recursion available, reply is
        authoritative.

## Inserting records into DNS
If a new company starts and wants to have a website, receive email, etc, they
must register with a DNS registrar.

This provides a name, IP address of authoritative name server (primary and
secondary). They will create two RRs in the DNS server, both synchronized. It
will also add an MX record.

## Attacking DNS
DNS is an open database, and is vulnerable to attacks. There are 13 root
servers.
* DDoS: bombard root servers with traffic. Unsuccessful to date due to traffic
    filtering and cached local DNS servers.
* Bombard TLD servers: potentially more dangerous.
* Redirect attacks:
    * Man-in-the-middle: intercepting queries and returning malicious results.
    * DNS poisoning: send bogus replies to DNS server, which it caches.
* Exploit DNS for DDoS

## DNS Encapsulation
DNS messages are encapsulated in UDP by default. If the response is expected to
exceed 512 bytes, TCP is used instead. If a request is sent over UDP and the
response is longer than 512 bytes, the response is sent over UDP with a TC
(truncated) flag. The resolver then resends the request using TCP.

