# Networking - 10/13/2014 - TCP and such.

## TCP segment structure:
TCP segments include a number of ports, numbers, pointers and data. Includes
acknowledgments, flags, etc.

The headers are used to compute checksums. Without a complete header, a packet
can't be uniquely identified.

## TCP Sequence Numbers, ACKs.
* sequence numbers: byte stream "number" of first byte in segment's data.
* acknowledgements: sequence number of next byte expected from other side.
    * Acknowledgements are cumulative. 
    * How a receiver handles out-of-order packets is determined by the implementer, not the TCP spec.

## Round trip time
TCP has to recover from the loss of packets. When each packet is sent, a timer
is set for an acknowledgement. Determining the time is difficult: If the RTT is
too short, you'll have premature timeouts and unnecessary retransmissions. If it
is too long, you'll have a slow reaction to segment loss.

How do we estimate this? The round trip time is averaged based off of previous
packets. Timers always decrement as the CPU can detect when the timer value hits
0.

## TCP reliable data transfer
TCP cretaes and rdt service on top of IP's unreliable service. Includes
pipelining segmeents, cumulative acks and a single retransmission timer.
Retransmissions are triggered by timeout events, duplicate acks.

Consider a simplified TCP sender, which ignores duplicate acks, flow control and
congestion control.

* data received from application: create a segment with a sequence number, start
    timer, etc.
* timeout: retransmit segment, restart timer.
* acknowledgement received: send next segment, restart timer.

## TCP Fast Restraint

Timeout period is often long, so this allows TCP to detect lost segments via
duplicate acks. If three duplicate acks are received, the packet will be resent.

## TCP Three-way handshake

TCP uses a three-way handshake to verify that a client is connected to a server.
Not a perfect solution, but a functional approximation that client and server
have connected successfully.
