# Networking - 10/15/2014 - 

## TCP Handshakes
In practice, we use three-way handshakes to determine that a connection has been
established. This is considered an approximation, otherwise we'd have to
constantly send ACKS back and forth forever.

## Closing the connection
Either the client or the server can close the connection, which is indicated by
sending a FIN bit = 1. The other party responds with an ACK, which can be
combined with a FIN bit. Simultaneous FIN bits can also be exchanged.

This is more complicated than opening due to some unresolved timing issues.
Suppose the client wants to close the connection and sends a TCP segment with
the FIN bit set. It is received on the other side, needs to be acknowledged.
Once it is, the client can no longer send data, but the server can until it
sends a segment with the FIN bit set.

## Principles of Congestion Control

Congestion is informally "too many sources sending too much data too fast for
the network to handle it." This is still a complicated problem to solve, and
results in a massive loss of data.

Consider a system with two senders and two receivers, where all connections go
through a single router. When the queue on that router is full, it will start
dropping packets. *This* is congestion.

Idealization: known loss. Packets can be lost if they are dropped by the
router. Ideally, the sender would only resend a packet if it is known to be have
been lost. This is difficult to implement.

Realistic: congestion collapse, that is, more data going in, little data coming
out. Many packets are resent over and over, resulting in little work being
done.


## Approaches to Congestion Control
* end-to-end congestion control: no explicit feedback, congestion infrerred from
    end-system observed loss and delay, used by TCP.
* network-assisted congestion control: network provided feedback, single bit
    indicating congestion, explicit rate to send data at.

TCP handles this with additive increases and multiplicative decreases. The
transmission rate increases linearly until packets are known to be dropped, then
the rate is cut in half. This scheme is abbreviated as AIMD.

## Phases of TCP
* Slow start: when the connection begins, it increases its rate exponentially
    until first loss event. Initial rate is slow, but it speeds up quickly.
* Congestion avoidance
    
## Detecting, reacting to loss
Loss is indicated by timeouts or three duplicate ACKS.

## TCP Fairness
A fairness goal is defined as follows: if K TCP sessions share the same
bottleneck link of bandwidth R, each should have an average rate of R/K.
