# Networking - 10/22/2014 - The Network Layer

## The Network Layer

There are two main protocols used in the network layer, IP and ICMP.

* In terms of functionality, the network layer (Layer 3), provides all routing via
    the RIP, OSPF and BGP protocols. It also provides communication from machine to
    machine.
* IP protocol handles addressing conventions, datagram format and packet handling
    conventions. ICMP handles error reporting and routing.
* Forwarding tables and routing tables are used to send packets where they need
    to be.
* Services on this layer are provided to layer 4, connecting machines across
    networks, instead of process-to-process.

Layer 3 is required for any device to connect over the internet. Layer 4
(transport layer) is not strictly required for moving data, but it is to
communicate between processes.

## Communication

Communication at this layer can be connection-oriented or connectionless.
* A datagram network provides network-layer connectionles service.
* A virtual-circuit network provides network-layer connection-oriented service.
    This is analogous to TCP/UDP.

Routing algorithms at this level determine the end-to-end path through a
network. Forwarding tables determine local forwarding on a single router.

This layer uses virtual connections, not physical ones. The main protocols are
ATM, frame relay and X.25. Both terminal nodes and intervening routers must
establish a virtual connection before datagrams can flow.

Network vs Transport Layer connection service:
* network: between two hosts (may involve intervening routers in case of VCs).
* transport: between two processes.

Some protocols use different service models. Internet uses best effort. ATM uses
constant bit rate (CBR), variable bit rate (VBR), available bit rate (ABR) and
unspecified bit rate (UBR).

## Virtual Circuit Networks

Virtual circuit networks behave similarly to a telephone circuit, following a
source-destination path.

They consist of a path from source to destination, 

* Used to setup, maintain and teardown VC. 
* Used in ATM, X.25.

### Datagram Networks:
* no call setup at network layer.
* routers do not remember the state of end-to-end connections.
* packets forwarded using destination host address.

## Internet Protocol (IP)
IP provides services to the transport layer, and uses services from the link
layer. It provides best effort, connectionless packet delivery. IP packets can
be lost, out of order or duplicated. Higher layers deal with these errors.

Make sure you know the structure of IP headers.

IP Headers include a time to live (TTL), protocol being used (TCP, UDP, ICMP), a
header checksum, source IP address and destination IP address.
