# Networking - 11/03/2014 - Routing

## Routing Architecture
Two key router functions:
    * run routing algorithms/protocols (RIP, OSPF, BGP).
    * forwarding datagrams from incoming to outgoing link.

Forwarding in routers is based on longest prefix match.

## Input port functions
The input port has a queue that catches packets if they arrive faster than they
can be processed.

Thee are three types of switching fabric:
* memory-based: requires high speed memory. First gen routers were traditional computers
    with switching controlled by the CPU.
* bus-based: datagram moved from input memory to output memory via a shared bus.
    Contention occurs when switching speed is limited by the bus bandwidth.
* crossbar: overcomes bus limitations, but requires an advanced design,
    fragmenting the datagram into fixed length cells.

## Output Ports:
Output ports need bufffering for when datagrams arrive from fabric faster than
the transmission rate. Scheduling is also necessary to choose among queued
datagrams for transmission.

Queuing delay and loss are a byproduct of output port buffer overflow.

## Input Port Queuing:
Fabric can be slower than input ports combined - queuing may occur at input
queues. Head-Of-The-Line (HOL) Blocking queues datagrams at the front of the
queue to prevent other queues from moving forward.

## How Much Buffering?
RFC 3439 provides a rule of thumb: average buffering equals the RTT times the
link capacity C. With N flows, buffering equals RTT * C / sqrt(N).

## Routing Algorithm Classification
Routing algorithms can be global (all routers have complete topology), or
decentralized (only knows physically connected neighbors). They can also being
static (route changes slowly over time) or dynamic (routes change frequently,
with periodic updates in response to link cost change). Most networks today are
decentralized and dynamic.
