# Algorithms lecture - September 02, 2014

## Notes on induction.

A typically mistake is to take a smaller object and add to it. You want to take
a larger object and subtract from it.

Ex. Relate the number of full nodes to the number of leaves in a tree. An
example tree with 2 full nodes has 3 leaves...

The point is that while you may be able to add to create a particular situation
(`n = n+1`) you did not necessarily create all possible situations. Start
from `p(n+1)` and work down to `p(n)`.

## Induction makes you a better programmer.

Take a single linked list with dummy headers, programmed in C.

```C
typedef struct node
{
    int data;
    struct node * next;
} node;

node dummy;

void print(node * ptr)
{
    if (ptr == NULL)
        abort();

    /* Loop invariant: ptr is not null, ptr->next is not null */
    while(ptr->next != NULL)
    {
        printf("%d", ptr->next->data);
        ptr = ptr->next;
    }
}

int pos(node * ptr, int value)
{
    if (ptr == NULL)
        abort();

    if (ptr->next->data == value)
        return 1;

    if (ptr->next == NULL)
        return 0;

    ptr = ptr->next;

    int y = pos(ptr, value);

    if (!y)
        return 0;
    else
        return y + 1;
}
```

For the purposes of this course, think of induction and recursion as the same
thing.

## Big Oh Notation
Running time is one of the important things to consider about algorithms. But
not the only thing.

Big-Oh is the upper bound running time of an algorithm.

Why do we use Big Oh?
* Actual running times can be difficult to reason about, but upper bounds tend
    to be more predictable.
* We're computer scientists, and lazy.

The Big Oh of a function is a set of functions bounded by some constant c where
all values of n<sub>0</sub> are natural numbers such that all values of n are
greater than or equal to n<sub>0</sub> and 0 &lte; f(n) &lte; c * g(n).

## Big Omega Notation

Big Omega of a function is a set of functions in which there exists a value c
&gt; 0 and n<sub>0</sub> is in the set of natural numbers such that all n &gte;
n<sub>0</sub> and 0 &lte; c * g(n) &lte; f(n).

## Theta
Theta of a function is the set of functions by which a function is both upper
and lower-bounded, though not by the same constant.

## More on Laziness.

Suppose we want the sum of i from 1 to n (Arithmetic Series). This is bounded by
O(n<sup>2</sup>).

Suppose we don't know that this is an arithmetic series: You can eyeball the
growth rate of a function and find a value for Big Oh, Big Omega and Big Theta
that is good enough.
