# Networking - 09/08/2014

## Network Core Functions
* routing: determines source-destination route taken by packets.
    * Uses routing algorithms.
* forwarding: move packets from router's input to appropriate router output.
    * uses forwarding tables

## Circuit Switching
Typically used in telephone networks. Call signaling is done with packet
switching, but voice communication uses circuit switching.

When creating a communication path, one side sends an Initial Address Message
(IAM). When received, the other sends an Address Complete Message (ACM) and
the voice link is then established.

## Delays

### Queueing Delay
There are three factors in queueing delay:
* R: link bandwidth (bps)
* L: packet length (bits)
* a: average packet arrival rate.

Queueing delay is determined by the relationship between these factors:
* La/R ~ 0: average queueing delay is small.
* La/R approaches 1: average queueing delay is large.
* La/R &gt; 1: more "work" arriving than can be served - infinite average delay.

## Traceroute
Traceroute works by sending out UDP packets with incrementally larger
times-to-live (TTL). It drops a packet at each router between source and
destination and sends back an ICMP packet. This ends up telling you the path
between source and destination, along with time estimates.

## Ping
Ping allows you to determine if some interface is active, and returns a delay.

## Internet Protocol Stack
The internet is composed of five layers:
* application
* transport
* network
* link
* physical

## The ISO/OSI reference model
Proposed before the internet, this is a separate model from the internet. Has
7 layers:

## Encapsulation:
Encapsulation in networking is the concept that some information is abstracted
during transfer within the layers of the protocol stack.

First, a message is generated at the application layer. It is passed down to the
transport layer. A header is appended to the message. It is then passed down
again, to the network layer, where another header is added. This continues until
the bottom of the stack.

At the next node in transit, headers are removed and added as necessary along
the way to the destination.

## Network Security
The original Internet was not designed with security in mind. It was designed as
a community of mutual trusting users in a transparent environment.

## Malware
Malware is malicious software designed to propagate across a network. Different
types include:
* virus
* worm
* spyware
* botnets

## Packet Sniffing
Wireshark is a packet sniffing application. By running it in promiscuous mode,
it will sniff out all packets, returning source and destination addresses,
payloads, etc.

## IP Spoofing
IP Spoofing is the practice of sending a packet with a false source address.
This can make them send privileged information to a non-privileged user.
