# Networking - 09/10/2014 - Application Layer

## Principles of Network Applications
This layer is meant for applications only. Protocols at this level include
HTTP(S), (S)FTP, telnet, SMTP, etc.

There are two models on the application level: client-server and peer-to-peer.

## Examples of network applications:
* email (SMTP)
* voip (Skype)
* video streaming
* etc.

## Creating a network application
If you want to write your own application, you need to write something to
communicate with the transport layer, as it needs to communicate over the
network.

You don't have to write code to communicate with network core services. Lower
levels take care of this for you, due to abstraction. It is inaccessible, and
standardized for ease of use.

## Client-Server Applications
Simplest architecture for network applications.

Server examples include:
* FTP
* HTTP
* SMTP

To communicate with a server, you need to know its IP address, and the
associated port (ex. HTTP defaults to :80). They are often located in data
centers, which allows for scaling and redundancy.

Clients communicate with the server, not with each other directly. Clients can
have dynamic IP addresses.

This model was discovered accidentally. Computers were expensive, so users
wanted to put the majority of servers on a mainframe, and connect via a dumb
client. Clients became powerful, as much so as servers, leading to the
peer-to-peer architecture.

## Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
In P2P, there is no distinction between client and server; every node in the
service behaves the same way. Requests are sent to other clients, which are
intermittently connected and change IP addresses.

This architecture can require compelx management.

### Advantages
P2P systems include no central point of failure: if a node is
taken down, the rest of the system can continue operating. Additionally, the
system scales better, as it doesn't have to rely on a single or even multiple
servers. Instead, peers share the system load.

### Disadvantages:
In P2P systems, there are no guarantees that computers will behave in the same
manner or have the same capabilities.

### Types of P2P architectures:
* Centralized: unstructured or structured
* Decentralized: unstructured or structured
* Hybrid: unstructured or structured

### Examples:
* Napster: first large scale peer-to-peer system designed for sharing digital
    music files. Led to big lawsuits.
    * How did it work? One central server, where files would be sent. If a file
        was requested, the server would then tell the address of a client that
        had the specified file.

## Process Communication
Processes run on some host. Within the same host, processes communicate via
**inter-process communication** (interop). They do so by exchanging **messages**.

In client-server, the server is always passively listening, and the client
always initiates. When requests come in, they are queued. 

## Sockets
Processes send/receive messages at a **socket**.

## Addressing Processes
Machines are identified via IP address. Similarly, to receive messages,
processes must have an **identifier**. These are machine-dependent. Identifiers
are constructed from the 32 bit IP address of the machine, and the service port.

## Application Layer Protocol Definitions
The app-layer protocol defines numerous things:
* types of messages exchanged
* message syntax: what fields the mssage has.
* message semantics: what each field means
* rules for when and how processes send and respond to messages
* open protocols defined by RFCs, which allow for interoperabiility. Examples
    include HTTP, SMTP.
* proprietary protocols like Skype.

## What transport service does an app need?
* data integrity: some apps need 100% data deliver, in order.
* timing: some apps require low delay in order for effective use.
* throughput: some apps need a certain rate of transfer in order to be effective
* security: encryption, data integrity, etc.

## Transport Protocol Services
* TCP: provides reliable transport, flow control, congestion control and is
    connection oriented. It does not provide timing, minimum throughput or
    security. It is stream-oriented: treats a flow of data as a contiguous unit,
    not as individual packets.
* UDP: unreliable data transfer, and doesn't provide reliability, flow control,
    congestion control, throughput guarantee, security or connection setup. So
    why use it? 

## Securing TCP:
Neither TCP nor UDP have built-in security. You must use SSL (Secure Socket
Layer), which provides a secure connection for TCP. Modern implementations
include TLS. This works at the application layer via an API. This way, cleartext
is encryptd during transfer.

# Transport Layer
The transport layer provides logical communication between app processes running
on different hosts.

This layer breaks up messages into segments, and sends them back and forth as
necessary.

## Transport vs. Network Layer
* network layer: logical communication between hosts
* transport layer: logical communication between processes.

There are two protocols used in the transport layer: TCP, which allows for
reliable, in-order communication with a number of assurances, and UDP, which
provides unreliable, unordered communication, which doesn't require a
connection.

## Multiplexing/Demultiplexing
Multiplexing allows the transfer of data from multiple sockets, which is
organized with transport headers. Demultiplexing compiles disparate packets by
using the header info that was appended to packets.
