# Networking - 09/29/2014 - UDP stuff

## TODO: Read the book. It will help.

## The UDP Pseudo-header
* A pseudo-header is prepended to the user datagram for the checksum calculation.
* The format is the source IP, destination IP,
* It allows the datagram to be uniquely identified in the 4-tuple. Same thing is required in TCP.

## Reliable Data Transfer
We can use finite state machines to ensure that data is transferred reliably.

### Principles
* this is important in application, transport and link layers.
* characteristics of an unreliable channel will determine complexity of the
    reliable data transfer protocol (rdt).

### rdt1.0
* provides reliable transfer over a reliable channel.
* the underlying channel is perfectly reliable.
    * no bit errors, or packet loss.
* separate FSMs for sender, reciever:
    * sender sends data into the underlying channel.
    * reciever reads data from underlying channel.
* Problems: doesn't provide buffering.

### rdt2.0
* the underlying channel may flip bits in packets, and uses checksums to detect
    the errors.
* how to recover from errors:
    * acknowledgements (ACKs): receiver explicitly tells the sender the packet
        was received OK.
    * negative acknowledgements (NAKs): receiver explicitly tells the sender the
        packet was received with errors.
    * depending on what was received, the sender may resend.
* introduces extra complexity, round-trip delay (which requires estimation), and
    error checking.
* FATAL FLAW: what happens if ACK/NAK are corrupted? The sender resends the
    current packet.
    * The protocol numbers packets, so duplicates will be discarded.

### rdt3.0
* Also known as alternating bit protocol: packets are numbered 0 or 1.
* Won't send subsequent packets until an ACK is received for the current one.
* If an error is encountered (i.e. packet loss), there is a timeout, and the
    last packet is resent.
* If a packet is sent, but the ACK is lost, duplicates will be detected later on
    and managed. The same scenario happens if there is a premature timeout.
* Performance:
    * rdt3.0 is correct, but has poor performance.

## Pipelined Protocols
* Go-back-N: sender can have up to N unacked packets. Receiver only sends
    cumulative ack. Sender has timer for oldest unacked packet. If the timer
    expires, it retransmits all unacked packets.
* Selective Repeat:
