# Databases - 09/03/2014 - Introduction to Relational Models

## What is a data model?

A schema providing the underlying structure to database. Describes it on a
physical, logical, and view level. In application programming, you work at the
logical level.

There are several data models. The two we focus on are the relational model and
the entity-relational model.

Why do we use data models? What do they give us? Can we model too much?

## Database Design Phases

* Conceptual design: using the entity-relationship model
* Logical design: using the relational model
* Physical design

## The Relational Model

A record-based model; a collection of tables of data and relationships between
data.

A row represents a relationship between data; referred to as a tuple.

A single value in a row is an attribute.

### What is a relation?

A relation is a subset of { D<sub>1</sub>, ... D<sub>n</sub> }, where D is a
column in a database.

### Attribute Types

Each attribute has a name. The set of all values of an attribute is the domain.
These should be atomic (not multi-value or composite).

There is a special value *null* that is a value in every domain. This can cause
problems (as null always does).

### Relation Schema

Given that A<sub>1</sub> ... A<sub>n/sub> are attributes, the set of all A's is
a relation schema. The set of all relation schema is the database schema.

### Relation Instances

Relation instances are instances of a relation (a tuple). These can change over
time as values are defined/redefined.

## What is a database?

In simple terms, a set of relations. They can be (and usually are) defined
poorly.

## Keys
Keys are how tuples are distinguished. They are integral to database design.
They model constraints in the real world. Without them, you have to run
complicated operations in order to retrieve records.

Superkeys are keys that uniquely identify a tuple. Candidate keys are minimal
superkeys.

Primary keys are candidate keys chosen by the DBA. It is usually listed
first, and serve as the principle means of identifying a tuple. They should
change very little.

## Relational Query Language
A language for querying from a database. They can be procedural or
non-procedural (declarative).

## Relational Algebra
Mathematical foundation of relational query languages. Allow us to build complex queries
using multiple operations. 
