# Databases - Formal Relational Query Languages - 09/08/2014

## Intro to the Relational Algebra
The relational algebra is a procedural query language based on set theory. Since
the output is a relation, you can easily build complex queries.

### What is the difference between procedural and non-procedural languages?
In procedural languages, you describe how you want to retrieve your information.
Non-procedural or declarative languages allow you to describe the data you want,
not how to get it.

### Six Basic Operations
* select
* project
* union
* set difference
* cartesian product
* rename

#### Select Operation
Takes an relation as an input parameter and specifies a selection predicate.
Returns all tuples that verify for that predicate. The number of relations input
is the same number output.

#### Project Operation
Takes a relation and returns a subset of the attributes in that relation.

#### Union Operation
Union combines two relations **IFF** they are union-compatible: same number of
attributes and compatible domains.

#### Set Difference
Taking two relations R and S, set difference returns a relation containing all
values in R that do not exist in S. Same requirements as union.

#### Cartesian Product Operation
Takes two relations R and S and returns a relation containing a combination of
all values in R and S. If the relations are not disjoint, renaming is necessary.

#### Rename Operation
Allows us to rename attributes in a relation. Useful for creating cartesian
products of non-disjoint data.

### Composition of Operations
In most cases, we can combine operations to create complex queries.

### Additional Operations

#### Set-Intersection Operation
Given two relations R and S, it returns a relation where R and S intersect.

#### Natural Join Operation
Given two relations R and S, and returns a relation where the attributes are
equal, and removes all duplicates.

## Query Exercise
1. Find all loans &gt; $1200: sigma(amount) &gt; 1200(loan)
2. Find the loan number of each loan of an amount &gt; $1200:
pi(loan.number(sigma(amount) &gt; 1200(loan)))
3. Find the names of all customers who have a loan, an account or both:
pi(customerName)(borrower) union pi(customerName)(depositor)
4. Find the names of all customers who have a loan at the Perryridge Branch:
sigma(borrower.customerName) pi(borrower.customerName) bowtie(borrower & loan)
5. Find the names of all customers who have a loan at the Perryridge branch but
do not have an account at any other branch of the bank: sigma(loan.branchName)
bowtie(borrower & loan) - sigma(loan)
6. Find the names of all customers who have a loan and an account: 
