# Databases - 09/10/2014 - Formal Relational Query Languages

## Review of the Fundamental Operations
* select (sigma): returns relation that satisfies the arguments.
* project (pi): returns a relation containing only the attributes given.
* union: returns the set union of two relations
* set difference: returns tuples in R that do not exist in S.
* Cartesian product
* rename

## Additional Operations
* set intersection: returns items that are in R and S, but not in both.
* natural join: returns a new relation where R and S are combined and duplicates
    are removed. Note - natural join is **associative** and **commutative**.
* theta join: variation of natural join that doesn't ensure equality.
* outer join: extension of the join operation that avoids loss of information.
    Computes join and adds tuples where one relation doesn't match the other,
    and uses null values.
* division: given two relations R and S, returns a relation containing tuples
    from R which matched the values in S.
* assignment: sets the value of the left argument to the relation variable of
    the right argument

## Null Values
Null values in databases return a special truth value: unknown. Select returns
false if unknown is encountered, and arithmetic can get weird.

## Making Modifications to a Database
When we want to make modifications to a database, we can model those operations
with assignment.

## Extended Operations
* Generalized projection: allows you to do arithmetic and string operations in
    the projection operation.
* Aggregate Functions: aggregate functions combine multiple tuples and returns a
    single value. These functions can be distinct, eliminating multiple
    occurrences of a value before performing the operation. The result of
    aggregation doesn't have a name. You can use a rename operation or the *as*
    keyword.

## Multiset Relational Algebra
Pure relational algebra removes all duplicates. Multiset relational algebra
retains duplicates to match SQL semantics.

## SQL and Relational Algebra
`select A1, A2, ... An from r1, r2, rm ... where P` and any other SQL query can
be matched to a relational algebra statement.
