# Databases - 09/22/2014

## SQL Operations:
* rename
* string operators
* set operations
* aggregate functions

### When do you use the rename operation?
* Aggregate functions.
* Relations

### String Operations.
How would you select **dept_name** from **instructor** where **dept_name** is
"Comp"? `select * from instructor where dept_name like "Comp%"`

### Aggregate Functions
Find the average salary of instructors in each department.
`select dept_name, avg(salary) as avg_salary from instructor`

### Scalar Subqueries
Scalar subqueries typically return a single value, usually using aggregate functions.

## Modifications of a Database

### Deletions
`delete from r where P;`

This deletes whole tuples, and you can only delete on one relation at a time.

### Insertions
Insertions can be singular or multiple. You have bound by the domains of the
relation.

```sql
insert into course values (...)
insert into course(...) values(...)
```

### Updates
If you already have data in a relation, you may want to change it without
deleting it. Updates can be conditional, and can be done with scalar subqueries.

## Joins
Join operations take two relations and return a new one.

Join is a Cartesian product operation that requires that the relations have the
same attributes.

* Natural join: returns whatever is in common between relations.
* join with using clause: similar to natural join except not all attributes that
    are the same are joined upon.
* join with on condition: similar to using where clause, but behaves differently
    in outer join. Not constrained to attributes having the same name.

### Outer Joins
Outer joins are an extension of join that avoids loss of information. Add tuples
to the relation where the two originals do not match, using null values.

NOTE: MySQL doesn't support full outer joins. Deal with it.

## Transactions
Transactions are a database unit of work. It is a sequence of statements and
queries and ends on a **commit** or a **rollback**. By default, most databases
commit automatically.

Transactions are atomic operations: they are either all saved or none at all.
Preserves data integrity.

## Data Types
Beyond the basic data types, there are:
* date
* time
* timestamp
* interval

These data types are implemented differently in different databases.

You can set default types in schemas, which prevents null values and allows you
to create records without dictating all data values.

You can index your database to speed up queries. Particularly helpful if you
know that value will be queried a lot. This is similar in value to inline
functions in a language like C++.

There are large object types, called **blobs** and **clobs**. These can be used
to store data like pictures and videos. This allows you to access data via
pointers, instead of grabbing all of the data in each query.

Users can also defined their own types, called *user-defined types*. This can be
particularly helpful if you know the problem domain well, as it can help you
model problems more effectively.
